# SMART-GAUNTLET-GESTURE-VOCALIZER-AND-VISUALIZER

PROBLEM STATEMENT:
Deaf and Dumb as well as paralyzed patient can use their hand gesture to satisfy their basic needs.

INTRODUCTION:
The world today is powered by technology, fueled by information and driven by knowledge. Human beings have a natural ability to see, listen and interact with their external environment and are gifted with five senses: vision, hearing, touch, taste, and smell. Some may have a disability in any of the five senses. We concentrate on the disabilities of speech impaired and visually impaired persons. Even those who do speak aloud typically have a “deaf voice” of which they are self-conscious and that can make them reticent. The blind people can talk freely by means of normal language whereas the deaf-dumb have their own manual-visual language known as sign language. When a speech impaired person speaks to a normal person, the normal person finds it difficult to understand and asks the deaf-dumb person to show gestures for his/her needs. Sign language is a very organized and highly developed nonverbal language which utilizes both hand gestures and facial expressions to convey the essence of what an individual is trying to say. This is quite a challenge as knowledge of sign language is known to people in very limited circles, usually family members of the deaf and mute community. Not every person can understand and comprehend sign language based communication such people depend on other means of communication like sign language. This gauntlet is for people in the deaf and dumb communities when they try to engage in interaction with others, especially in their educational, social and professional environments communicating gestures may be difficult to understand by a normal person. Therefore, it is necessary to have an advanced gesture recognition or sign language detection system to bridge this communication gap. The project aims to facilitate people by means of a glove-based communication interpreter system.The objective is to create a device which helps the hearing or speech impaired persons to communicate with others. In order to overcome this, gestures are converted to information in the form of display and voice playback using Arduino no controller with the help of flex sensor. It compares the input signal with predefined voltage levels stored in memory. In this project, a glove is fitted with flex sensors along each finger. This glove is a normal, cloth driving glove fitted with flex sensors along the length of each finger. They are often used in gloves to sense finger movement. Flex sensors are analog resistors. They work   as   variable   analog   voltage   dividers. Inside the   flex   sensor   are carbon resistive elements within a thin flexible substrate. The flex sensors give output in the form of voltage variation that varies with degree of bend. This flex sensor output is given to the ADC channels of Arduino Uno. It processes the signals and perform analog to digital signal conversion. Further the processed data is sent in a wireless manner to the receiver section. In this section, the gesture is recognized and the corresponding output is a speech output  played back through mobile speaker which would be helpful for both the visually impaired and speech impaired people. The portability of this project is a major advantage. Thus with the help of this project, the barrier faced by these people in communicating with the society can be reduced to a great extent. 
